# The `FAMatch` class

## Background

Like the `TokenSequence` class, the `FAMatch` class ("FA" stands for
"finite automaton") is primarily just a container for tracking the
extractions returned by various extractors.  Most of the interesting
information is stored in member variables, though a few convenience
methods are provided for various purposes.  We document the most
salient member variables and methods, specifically those providing
access to other matches with which a match may be associated.

Internally, all matches of any language element are represented by 
instances of FAMatch class and its subclasses.  All instances are 
indexed against tokens, recording the start and end tokens of 
a particular match.  

There are two ways in which two matches may be associated, 
via *incorporation* and *coordination*.  The former association 
is made when the pattern associated with a [phrasal extractor](docs/VRPhraseExpressions.md) 
incorporates another named phrasal extractor by reference.  For example, consider the statement:

```
money -> $ @bignum
```

This defines a phrase extractor, called `money`, that looks for a
dollar sign followed by a phrase that matches another phrase
extractor, `bignum`, incorporated by reference.  Any `FAMatch` object
resulting from an application of `money` will carry information about
where `bignum` matched by pointing to another `FAMatch` object
internally.  Note that not all such references result in a submatch,
since they can occur in a sub-expression that's optional (e.g., is
followed by the `?` operator) or is one of several alternatives.  Note
also that the referenced extractors may themselves incorporate other
extractors by reference.  To gain access to the submatches generated
by those extractors, one typically needs to recurse, though we describe
a convenience function below that rolls all submatches into a flat
list.

The second association results from the application of 
[coordinator expressions](docs/VRCoordinators.md), which by design can be 
arbitrarily nested.  Every sub-expression results in its own match stream, 
all of which are tracked in the top-level matches.  For example, 
consider the expression: 

```
near(litigation, 10, match(patent_number, _))
```

This asks for for matches of the `litigation` extractor, but only
those that occur within 10 words of some match of the `patent_number`
extractor.  Consequently, the resulting stream only consists of
matches for `litigation`.  However, internally these matches contain
pointers to the other matches to which the coordinator has associated
them.  In other words, each `litigation` match contains a pointer to
some `patent_number` match.

## `FAMatch`

An `FAMatch` object has the following core member variables:

* `seq`: a reference to the `TokenSequence` object in which the match is found
* `begin`: the index of the first token in the matching phrase
* `end`: the index of the first token *after* the matching phrase, or the length of the token sequence if the match is coterminous with the end of the token sequence (but see note below)
* `submatches`: a list of matches extracted by extractors referenced by name
* `name`: if a match was returned by an extractor referenced by name, this field holds the name of the extractor

Note: There's a difference between how these matches are represented 
for phrasal matches and parse matches.  In phrasal matches, 
the `end` member variable points to the first token *after* the
tokens implicated in the match, exactly as described above.  However, 
in parse matches (see the `FAMatch` subclass `FAArcMatch` below), 
the end token is the token *at* the end of the matching dependency path.
In other words, for phrasal matches, the matched tokens are represented 
by `[begin,end)`-style indices, while for parse matches it's `[begin,end]`.

The following methods are provided:

* `start_offset(self)`: the character offset into the input text at which the match starts
* `end_offset(self)`: the character offset at which the match ends
* `matching_text(self)`: the verbatim matching string, as a phrase
* `all_submatches(self, name=None)`: returns all matches associated with any named subexpressions in the top-level extractor or any of its descendants

The `all_submatches` method optionally takes the name of a referenced
sub-extractor and returns only those submatches returned by that
sub-extractor.  Thus, if `m` is a match returned by the expression:

```
money -> $ @bignum
```

then the call following call provides access to the `FAMatch` object
corresponding to the numeric portion of the match:

```
quantity = m.all_submatches('bignum')[0]
```

## `CoordMatch`

Objects of the class `CoordMatch`, a subclass of `FAMatch`, are
generated by applying coordinator expressions.  In addition to the
standard fields of `FAMatch`, every `CoordMatch` object has an `op`
member variable that points to the object representing the coordinator
that produced it.  In addition, depending on the type and
parameterization of that coordinator, a `CoordMatch` may have
additional member variables pointing to coordinated matches.  The
relevant types are the same as documented in the
[page](VRCoordinators.md) on coordinator expressions.  Specifically,
we have the following types:

### Match expressions

Matches returned by [match-type](VRCoordinators.md#match-expressions)
coordinator operators, including `match` and `select`, always
include a `supermatch` field pointing to the match object against
which they were applied.  For example, if `m` is returned by the
expression:

```
match(my_extractor, _)
```

then `m.supermatch` refers to a `FAMatch` object that encompasses the
entire `TokenSequence`.

### Filter expressions

Matches returned by
[filter-type](VRCoordinators.md#filter-expressions) coordinator
operators, including `filter`, `prefix`, and `suffix`, may include a
`submatch` field pointing to the coordinated match that was used for
filtering.  This field will be absent if the operator was *inverted*,
if we requested matches that *do not* have the indicated coordinated
matches (because those matches don't exist). For example, consider the
expression:

```
nps_with_the ~ filter(has_the, match(noun_phrase, _))
```

The hypothetical expression finds noun phrases, then applies the
`has_the` extractor to each to retain only those that include the word
"the".  All resulting `CoordMatch` objects will have a `submatch`
field pointing to the corresponding match of the `has_the` extractor.
If we say '1' instead of '0', we invert the filter, returning all noun
phrases that lack the word "the".  Consequently, no submatch exists.

### Join expressions

Matches returned by [join-type](VRCoordinators.md#join-expressions)
coordinator operators, including `union`, `inter`, `contains`, and
`overlaps`, have `left` and `right` member variables that point to
matches from the two subexpressions that are "joined."

The way in which these fields are used differs subtly across these
operators.  Because the `union` operator pulls together matches
returned by either sub-expression, in cases where a match is found by
only one sub-expression, the *other* field will be `None`.  Thus, if
the left expression yields a match not found by the right expression,
it is included in the union with the `right` field set to `None`.  In
contrast, not only are both these fields always non-`None` in matches
generated by the `inter` operator, but the two matches always have
identical extent (the same `begin` and `end` indexes) as well.  Note that
these paired matches will generally not be identical in other
respects, since they typically are returned by distinct expressions.
The `left` and `right` fields returned by the `contains` and
`overlaps` operators are also always non-`None`, and they typically
(though not necessarily) have distinct extents.

### Proximal expressions

Matches returned by
[proximity-type](VRCoordinators.md#proximal-expressions) are similar
to filter-type matches.  They often have a `submatch` field pointing
to a match from the proximal stream.  For example, a match of the
expression:

```
near(litigation, 10, match(patent_number, _))
```

is a match of the `litigation` extractor found near some match of the
`patent_number` extractor.  The `submatch` field in such cases will
point to the proximal `patent_number` match.  Note that if the
expression is inverted, there will be no `submatch` field.

### Connect expressions

Matches returned by the [`connects` operator](VRCoordinators.md#connect-expressions)
each include `left`, `right`, and `submatch` fields.  The meaning of these fields is
probably best explained with an example:

```
connects(direct_object, match(meet, _), match(person, _))
```

This expression wants to find matches of `meet` and `person` that are
in a syntactic relation matched by the `direct_object` extractor,
which should correspond to a [parse
expression](VRParseExpressions.md).  The resulting match encompasses
both the `meet` and `person` matches in extent and points to them in
the `left` and `right` fields, respectively.  The `submatch` field
points to a match of the `direct_object` extractor.  This is a special
kind of `FAMatch` object documented in the next section.

## `FAArcMatch`

Instances of `FAArcMatch` are generated by parse expressions.  They
are functionally similar to `FAMatch` objects, differing in one key
respect: the 'end' field of a `FAArcMatch` contains the index of the
token *at* the end of the dependency path matched by the extractor, not
the first token *after* a matching phrase.

Other than this difference, one can interact with these objects as
with `FAMatch` objects.  But note that the semantics of these matches
is quite distinct, as they point to the end points of paths through
the parse tree, jumping over intervening tokens in many cases.

